[Unknown]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Last Sunday, I woke up after a drunken night of debauchery in a strange apartment.
[Amit Varma]: There was no one there.
[Amit Varma]: After I remembered who I was, I decided that I'd better get home quickly.
[Amit Varma]: I left the apartment, went to the lift and found that the lift wasn't working.
[Amit Varma]: Just besides the door to the lift, there was a tent, like an actual tent inside this apartment
[Amit Varma]: block.
[Amit Varma]: I peeped inside the tent and there was a family of four there.
[Amit Varma]: What are you guys doing here?
[Amit Varma]: I asked.
[Amit Varma]: Why are you in a tent?
[Amit Varma]: We are waiting for the lift to start working, the guy said.
[Amit Varma]: We are going to go watch a movie, but this lift is being repaired.
[Amit Varma]: So we put up this tent and now we are waiting.
[Amit Varma]: What nonsense?
[Amit Varma]: I said.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you just walk down?
[Amit Varma]: The whole family started laughing at me.
[Unknown]: Walk down?
[Amit Varma]: The woman said with a sneer.
[Amit Varma]: Do you know which floor we are on?
[Amit Varma]: This is the 800th floor of this building.
[Amit Varma]: We can't walk down 800 floors.
[Amit Varma]: The 800th floor, I said.
[Amit Varma]: What are you saying?
[Amit Varma]: That's impossible.
[Amit Varma]: This is Mumbai, the city with the low FSI.
[Amit Varma]: No building can ever have 800 floors here.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badman.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today is someone I have been reading for a decade and a half, but
[Amit Varma]: only got to meet recently.
[Amit Varma]: Alex Stabarrok is a professor of economics at the George Mason University and one half
[Amit Varma]: of the team that writes Marginal Revolution, which is my favorite blog of all time.
[Amit Varma]: He happens to be in Mumbai these days as a resident senior fellow at the IDFC Institute.
[Amit Varma]: Alex, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It's great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So you've been in Mumbai for a few weeks.
[Amit Varma]: How are you enjoying it?
[Guest]: I'm loving it here in Mumbai and also in India in general.
[Guest]: I must say I have done a lot of the tourist stuff.
[Guest]: I've been to the Taj Mahal, I've ridden an elephant.
[Guest]: I even see a Indian fake here getting the snake out of the basket.
[Guest]: I've never seen that, so well done.
[Guest]: I guess you have to go where the tourists go.
[Guest]: But it's also a fascinating place for an economist interested in development issues.
[Guest]: You really see the importance of economics, the importance of development economics.
[Guest]: You see the huge differences between the private sphere and the public sphere.
[Guest]: So it's a fascinating place to be.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me one significant thing you've noticed about Mumbai in the time that you've been
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Amit Varma]: How is it different from cities like, say, other Asian cities like Hong Kong, Singapore
[Guest]: and so on?
[Guest]: Well, Mumbai is an interesting city in that at first it looks normal, looks like you would
[Guest]: expect.
[Guest]: You do see some tall buildings, some skyscrapers and things like that.
[Guest]: But then when you think about it, Mumbai is on a peninsula.
[Guest]: There is very little land.
[Guest]: It's a huge city, has a tremendous population, over 20 million people.
[Guest]: And it actually looks more like L.A., more like a spread out city, a sprawling city than
[Guest]: it looks like the skyscraper city of Shanghai or New York.
[Guest]: It doesn't look like New York, and that's actually surprising because all of the economic
[Guest]: logic says that a city with so many people on such a small piece of land, it ought to
[Guest]: be tall, and it's not.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Guest]: Well, I think the major reason is there's a huge regulatory burden on building, and
[Guest]: in particular, there's an extraordinary low floor space index.
[Guest]: Now, what that means, if I can take a second to explain it, it means if you have a floor
[Guest]: space index of one, that means that on a 100 square meter piece of land, let's say, you
[Guest]: can build 100 square meters of floor space.
[Guest]: Or you could do that with one floor, a 100 square meter floor, or you could build on
[Guest]: half the land, on 50 square meters, and have two floors.
[Guest]: But you're still restricted to 100 square meters.
[Guest]: Or you could do it on a quarter of the land and have four floors.
[Guest]: Now, Mumbai has a tremendously low floor space index, only 1.33 in large parts of the city.
[Guest]: Now, to give you some comparison, New York has got a floor space index of 15, Hong Kong
[Guest]: is up there at 12, Singapore is anywhere between 12 and 25.
[Guest]: So in New York, you can build much taller than you can here.
[Guest]: And because of the restrictions on building really tall buildings, that has a lot of negative
[Guest]: consequences, I think, for Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the rationale behind having a low FSI?
[Amit Varma]: Why did our regulators decide that, oh, it should only be 1.3?
[Guest]: It's very peculiar.
[Guest]: I think what happened was Mumbai has gotten into a negative equilibrium.
[Guest]: It's gotten into the wrong equilibrium, and for the following reasons.
[Guest]: The initial argument was that if you allow people to build really tall buildings, you'll
[Guest]: have too much congestion, and you'll overwhelm the sewage system or the road system, things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But actually, when you've got so many people in such a small area of land, you want to
[Guest]: make as much use of that land as possible, right?
[Guest]: You want to economize on land.
[Guest]: And the way to economize on land is to build tall.
[Guest]: And that creates a lot of value.
[Guest]: When you're able to build tall, and you're able to put people in close proximity with
[Guest]: one another, you put all people in a firm in the same building, you put all types of
[Guest]: people who interact with one another, you put them close together, you get a lot of
[Guest]: positive feedback, a lot of externalities, you get a lot of value.
[Guest]: So in fact, that value could be taxed in order to produce things like the sewage system and
[Guest]: areas like that, infrastructure like that.
[Guest]: So unfortunately, however, when you keep everything small, when you keep everything low, then
[Guest]: what happens is you get sprawl, you push the city out, you make it much more difficult
[Guest]: for people to talk with one another, to communicate with one another, to come together, you increase
[Guest]: congestion costs, as you know, driving in Mumbai could be quite the challenge.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really, really good at it.
[Amit Varma]: I think I'm the best driver in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the unintended effects, therefore, of having a low FSI?
[Guest]: Yeah, so one, as I said, is that you get sprawl.
[Guest]: So you get things are pushed farther and farther out, which Mumbai doesn't have the space for
[Amit Varma]: because it's a north to south city.
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly.
[Guest]: So you don't get the benefits of bringing people together.
[Guest]: And because you push people out, this means that, well, people have to commute to work.
[Guest]: And the commuting costs here are tremendous.
[Guest]: It takes hours to get 10 miles at some times.
[Guest]: If you're coming on the railways in Mumbai, they don't shut the doors on the railways
[Guest]: because people are hanging on the outside.
[Guest]: And I believe the last figures were 10 to 20 people dying every day on the Mumbai railways
[Guest]: just because so many people are trying to get downtown.
[Guest]: They're trying to get to where the economic activity is.
[Guest]: But they can't live downtown because the price of land has been pushed up so high.
[Guest]: And that's kind of a remarkable thing.
[Guest]: Mumbai is one of the richest cities in India, but India, of course, is a poor country.
[Guest]: Despite this fact, the ratio of land prices to incomes in Mumbai is one of the highest
[Guest]: in the entire world.
[Guest]: So the price of land here is one of the highest in the entire world.
[Guest]: And it makes it impossible for people to live close to where they work.
[Amit Varma]: It's complete madness.
[Amit Varma]: I often tell my friends that it's easier for me to buy a home in New Jersey than in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: It's so incredibly expensive, it doesn't make sense.
[Amit Varma]: But whenever I talk to my friends about FSI, we all have the same complaints about scarcity
[Amit Varma]: of land and the prices are so high.
[Amit Varma]: But the argument I always get for FSI is that, look, already our city services are sort of
[Amit Varma]: struggling to cope with what is already there in terms of water supply, in terms of electricity,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of parking space.
[Amit Varma]: And my argument always is that if you just allow them to grow upwards, all of those will
[Amit Varma]: evolve.
[Amit Varma]: There'll be a demand for it, there'll be money for it, as you pointed out, if you simply
[Amit Varma]: tax the value that is created by that.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me a sense of how other metropolises through the ages have evolved to grow upwards
[Amit Varma]: with these services evolving with them?
[Amit Varma]: Like, does it have something to do with what stage of economic growth a country is at?
[Guest]: Yeah, so let me get to that in a sort of a byway, because I want to make an important
[Guest]: point here is that, you know, Mumbai historically has grown by building land, by reclaiming
[Guest]: land from the sea.
[Guest]: You know, it started out as seven islands, and it has now been produced into a peninsula.
[Guest]: So Mumbai understands that the way to grow is to build land, to make land.
[Guest]: But in exactly the same way that filling in land from the sea is reclaiming land from
[Guest]: the sea, when you build high, you're reclaiming land from the sky.
[Guest]: So you're building more land.
[Guest]: And people don't seem to understand this.
[Guest]: It's a pretty simple point.
[Guest]: I mean, and if you look at New York, for example, because New York has grown tall, it's actually,
[Guest]: literally, as if you have multiplied the size of Manhattan by more than two and a half times.
[Guest]: So the actual land area which people can inhabit is two and a half times, more than two and
[Guest]: a half times the size of Manhattan Island itself.
[Guest]: And that's what really counts.
[Guest]: It's not the square kilometers per person, it's floor space per person.
[Guest]: And Mumbai actually has one of the lowest floor spaces per person in the world, 2.9
[Guest]: square meters compared to even a place like Shanghai, where we're talking more like 13
[Guest]: square meters.
[Guest]: So the thing that you want to think about when you're building tall, you're actually
[Guest]: creating more land.
[Guest]: And why Mumbai got on into this negative equilibrium, I'm not entirely sure.
[Guest]: But one of the reasons that it's so difficult to get out of it, as you well know, is that
[Guest]: the system has become incredibly corrupt.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the special interest groups that would be against a higher FSI?
[Amit Varma]: Who benefits from a low FSI?
[Guest]: So right now, I think the main beneficiaries from a low FSI are actually the bureaucrats
[Guest]: and the politicians.
[Guest]: Because the economic logic is so much in favor of building tall.
[Guest]: This means that there's a lot of money to be made when you build tall.
[Guest]: And that means that the developers are willing to pay big bribes.
[Guest]: And they are willing to do things to get around the law.
[Guest]: There's a bunch of, you know, fascinating ways in which developers working on the side
[Guest]: or on the sly with politicians and bureaucrats have managed to get around the law.
[Guest]: For example, carports are often not considered part of the FSI.
[Guest]: So when a plan is built, this is my understanding, you can literally have it where there's an
[Guest]: elevator which is supposed to take your car to the top, you're supposed to have a carport
[Guest]: at every floor.
[Guest]: And of course, nobody actually does this.
[Guest]: They just have that built into the plan.
[Guest]: And then the carport becomes actual living space, balconies are sometimes not included.
[Guest]: So you call it a balcony and it becomes, you know, part of your floor space.
[Guest]: So there's a whole bunch of ways in which developers have do manage to squeeze around
[Guest]: these laws.
[Guest]: But they all involve paying a lot of bribes to politicians and bureaucrats who benefit.
[Guest]: And I think they're the main beneficiaries.
[Guest]: It's hard to see them giving up this incredible source of revenue.
[Amit Varma]: So the existing rent seekers, obviously, will make sure that their revenue is intact.
[Amit Varma]: Just to go a little further back into history, FSI is not something that always existed as
[Amit Varma]: government regulation.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, originally, you started building land, you could build it as high as you wanted.
[Amit Varma]: So what is sort of the history behind it?
[Amit Varma]: How has it evolved in different countries?
[Amit Varma]: And what is so unusual about India in that sense?
[Guest]: Yeah, Mumbai is particularly unusual in this sense, in that the FSI actually used to be
[Amit Varma]: higher.
[Amit Varma]: Whoa.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, and this is one of the problems which Mumbai currently faces, is that a developer
[Guest]: may have an old building, which was built to a higher FSI.
[Guest]: And that building may be crumbling, it may be dilapidated, it should be in need of being
[Guest]: torn down and something else.
[Guest]: But if they tear it down, the new building will be under the new FSI rules, which are
[Guest]: actually lower.
[Amit Varma]: Whoa.
[Guest]: So, a crazy situation.
[Guest]: And I think what happened, though I'm not sure about all of the details, but I think,
[Guest]: you know, when a country freed itself from colonial rule, I think this made a very big
[Guest]: difference to what happened.
[Guest]: So for example, the United States freed itself from colonial rule 1777, at a time when, you
[Guest]: know, Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations had just been published, Hume, these people were writing,
[Guest]: this was the era of liberty, right?
[Guest]: So all of the thinkers at that time were John Locke, Adam Smith, were very pro-liberty.
[Guest]: So at the time that the United States freed itself from colonial rule, it was natural
[Guest]: to go in a pro-liberty direction, because that's where all the thinkers were at that
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: Now, you come sometime later to where a country like India, or some of the African countries,
[Guest]: where they freed themselves from colonial rule, and now the leading thinkers are so
[Guest]: socialist thinkers.
[Guest]: And it's natural then to rebel against England.
[Guest]: Maybe you think England means laissez-faire, or something like that.
[Guest]: And you go with the contemporary leading thinkers, and they're all planners, right?
[Guest]: And so you come and you say, oh, well, the way to build a modern society is we need to
[Guest]: plan everything.
[Guest]: And city planners are going to say how tall buildings are going to be.
[Guest]: They're going to say what buildings should be built where.
[Guest]: You know, these should only be residences.
[Guest]: These should only be factories.
[Guest]: They're going to try and plan everything.
[Guest]: And of course, that has worked out to be a disaster in practice.
[Amit Varma]: Alex, it was very enlightening talking to you.
[Guest]: Thanks a lot.
[Guest]: Great talking with you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: The big lesson from my chat with Alex is that for a city of reclamations, we haven't reclaimed
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: We need to reach for the sky.
[Amit Varma]: On that positive note, I'm signing off.
[Amit Varma]: See you again next Monday.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I won't actually see you, but you can listen to me.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Scene and the Unseen, Amit Varma will be talking to Karthik Shashidhar
[Unknown]: about future markets in agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: For more, go to sceneunseen.in.
[Unknown]: I'll see you then.
[Unknown]: Bye for now.